JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Barack Obama was born in the
United States,
period.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Reversing his
longstanding
claim, Donald Trump acknowledges
President
Obama is a native-born citizen,
as Hillary
Clinton argues history can't be
erased.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
He has led the birther movement
to delegitimize
our first black president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Then: In Syria, a
shaky cease-fire
is tested, as the U.N. attempts
to deliver
aid to those stuck in the
war-torn city of
Aleppo.
Plus: Protests from more than a
hundred Native
American tribes slow the
construction of an
oil pipeline near a reservation,
but the fight
is far from over.
LADONNA BRAVE BULL ALLARD,
Standing Rock Sioux
Tribe: When that oil spills,
who's going to
come save us?
We're Indian people.
We're expendable.
Who is going to come?
Who is going to come and give us
water?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
analyze a full
week of news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The presidential
campaign took
a sudden detour today, back to
President Obama's
origins.
For the first time, Donald Trump
said publicly
the president is, indeed,
American by birth.
But, in the process, he stirred
up a new storm
of criticism.
LISA DESJARDINS: For the
presidential opponents
both holding events within
blocks of the White
House, the day was a battle over
truths.
His aides had said it recently,
but, for the
first time, Donald Trump himself
acknowledged
President Obama is a
natural-born American
citizen.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
President Barack Obama was born
in the United
States, period.
Now we all want to get back to
making America
strong and great again.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: It was a
complete reversal
for the man who years stoking
the so-called
birther controversy.
This is on "The Today Show" in
2011.
DONALD TRUMP: You are not
allowed to be president
if you are not born in this
country.
He may not have been born in
this country.
LISA DESJARDINS: When the White
House made
the president's birth
certificate public two
weeks later, Trump questioned if
the document
was real.
And even as a presidential
candidate, in January
of this year, Trump refused to
acknowledge
the president was indeed born in
Hawaii.
WOLF BLITZER, CNN: Is he a
natural-born citizen?
DONALD TRUMP: Who knows?
Who knows?
Who cares right now?
LISA DESJARDINS: Today, clearly,
Hillary Clinton
cared, even before Trump spoke.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
For five years, he has led the
birther movement
to delegitimize our first black
president.
His campaign was founded on this
outrageous
lie.
There is no erasing it in
history.
LISA DESJARDINS: There was more
outrage from
members of the Congressional
Black Caucus,
who said Trump is unrepentant
and an opportunist.
REP.
G.K.
BUTTERFIELD (D), North Carolina:
By any definition,
Donald Trump is a disgusting
fraud.
LISA DESJARDINS: At the White
House today,
President Obama declined to
respond to Trump's
public change on the issue.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I was pretty confident about
where I was born.
I think most people were as
well.
And my hope would be that the
presidential
election reflects more serious
issues than
that.
LISA DESJARDINS: But Trump today
raised another
birther controversy.
He alleged Clinton is to blame.
DONALD TRUMP: Hillary Clinton
and her campaign
of 2008 started the birther
controversy.
I finished it.
LISA DESJARDINS: There is no
evidence of that.
Fact-checks proving it to be
false abound.
Clinton's 2008 campaign did
fight tooth and
nail with President Obama, but
she never questioned
his birthplace.
There was one more geographic
story today,
where Trump chose to hold his
event, his new
D.C. hotel.
When Trump took cameras on a
hotel tour, but
wouldn't allow producers who
would ask questions,
all of the major networks
refused to use the
footage, seeing it as a
publicity stunt.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Donald Trump
and Hillary
Clinton will be the only
candidates at the
first presidential debate in 10
days.
The Commission on Presidential
Debates said
today that Libertarian candidate
Gary Johnson
and Green Party nominee Jill
Stein don't have
high enough standings in public
opinion polls
to qualify.
In the day's other news: A
suicide bomber
killed at least 24 worshipers
and injured
dozens more at a Sunni mosque in
Northwest
Pakistan.
The attacker struck at the
village of Ambar
in a tribal region near the
Afghan border.
Despite this, security in
Pakistan has actually
improved since 2013, with
attacks dropping
by nearly half.
President Obama made a new push
today for
the Trans-Pacific trade deal.
It's been roundly denounced by
both Democrats
and Republicans during this
campaign season.
The president blamed that on
misinformation.
BARACK OBAMA: If you're
frustrated about rules
of trade that disadvantage
America, if you're
frustrated about jobs being
shipped overseas,
then you want to get this thing
passed, you
want to get this thing done.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republican
Governor John Kasich
of Ohio was among political and
business leaders
meeting with the president, and
urging Congress
to approve the deal.
But Senate Republican Leader
Mitch McConnell
says there won't be a vote
before Mr. Obama
leaves office.
On Wall Street today, dropping
oil prices
were a factor as the Dow Jones
industrial
average lost 88 points to close
at 18123.
The Nasdaq fell five and the S&P
500 dropped
eight.
For the week, the Nasdaq rose 2
percent.
The Dow and the S&P gained a
fraction.
And as of today, beer began
flowing beneath
the streets of a medieval
Belgian city.
After five months of
construction, a brewery
in Bruges opened a two-mile-long
underground
pipeline to pump beer to a
suburban bottling
plant.
It replaces heavy trucks rolling
down narrow,
cobblestone streets.
XAVIER VANNESTE, De Halve Maan:
We have up
to four to five of these tanker
trucks a day
sometimes, and that's really
becoming difficult
for environmental reasons.
But also, just in general, the
livability
of the inner center of Bruges is
sometimes
threatened to that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The pipeline was
partially
financed through a crowdfunding
appeal.
Top contributors receive a
bottle of beer
every day for the rest of their
lives.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a desperate
need for aid in Syria, despite
the shaky cease-fire;
Donald Trump's appeal in one of
Ohio's Democratic
strongholds; the ongoing battle
over the Dakota
oil pipeline; and much more.
Last Friday, the U.S. and Russia
announced
a deal to resume a tenuous
cease-fire in Syria,
in order to get much needed
humanitarian aid
to badly deprived civilians
throughout the
country.
It went into effect Monday
evening, and, thus
far, the results are mixed.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner begins our coverage.
MARGARET WARNER: The day began
with claims
of progress in the four-day old
cease-fire.
Syrian state television showed
bulldozers
apparently clearing the Castello
Road into
war-ravaged Aleppo.
That's the crucial link for
humanitarian aid
convoys to enter Aleppo from
Turkey.
The Russians also announced that
Syrian army
units had pulled out of the
area.
But, within hours, all that
changed.
LT.
GEN.
VLADIMIR SAVCHENKO, Syria
(through translator):
Opposition groups have not
started pulling
armor and weapons from Castello
Road.
As a result, Syrian military
vehicles and
government troops were returned
to the positions
they occupied earlier.
MARGARET WARNER: Rebel fighters
denied that,
and said government forces never
left in the
first place.
MAN (through translator): We are
currently
around a mile away from Castello
Road, whereas
the regime can be seen over
there traveling
through normally.
Nothing has changed for them.
It's only us who have been
forced to retreat.
MARGARET WARNER: The
finger-pointing left
U.N. convoys stuck at the
Turkish border for
another day, without Syrian
government permission
to enter.
JENS LAERKE, U.N. Office for the
Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs: We are
as ready to
go as we can possibly be.
The modalities for ensuring safe
passage have
not yet been cleared and given
to us so that
we can move.
MARGARET WARNER: Secretary of
State John Kerry
and Russian Foreign Minister
Sergei Lavrov
had negotiated the cease-fire in
Geneva last
weekend.
They spoke by phone today, and,
according
to the State Department, Kerry
said the delays
on opening access for
humanitarian aid were
unacceptable.
The White House went further,
blaming the
Russians.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
They are the ones that have made
a commitment
to use their influence with the
Assad regime
to reduce the violence and allow
humanitarian
access.
And either the Russians are
unable to live
up to the agreement.
Maybe they don't have the juice
and influence
that they claim to have and that
we all thought
they had.
Or maybe they're just unwilling.
MARGARET WARNER: Meanwhile,
there are other
signs the cease-fire is fraying.
Heavy fighting was reported
today around the
capital, Damascus.
And tensions have cropped up
within the U.S.-backed
coalition battling the Islamic
State in Syria.
This amateur video today was
said to show
Americans, possibly special
forces, leaving
a Syrian border town after
rebels protested
their presence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Margaret
joins me now.
So, Margaret, one week in, it
looks like this
deal is not holding up well.
What has gone wrong, and has
anything going
right?
MARGARET WARNER: Well, the one
thing that's
going right, Judy, is you don't
have all this
heavy bombing of civilians, so
we can't lose
sight of that.
People are allowed to go out in
Aleppo and
shop if there's anything to buy.
But what's not happening, as we
just showed
in the setup, is that
humanitarian aid is
not getting through.
And that was, as Josh Earnest
said, the Russians'
job to make sure that President
Assad would
let these convoys in, and
they're just not
getting in.
The two tracks, if both of those
were satisfied,
then they were going to set up
this joint
operations center, where the
U.S. and Russians
would somehow work together to
target the
Islamic State and the
al-Qaida-linked group
which used to be called the
Nusra Front.
But the White House made clear
today, unless
the other two checks are
satisfied, they're
not going to even get to this
joint integration
center or operational center.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, the Russians
are saying,
though, that the United States
bears some
of the responsibility.
MARGARET WARNER: Well, you know,
they have
a point.
The U.S. responsibility was to
lean on its
clients, which are the
U.S.-vetted or CIA-vetted
rebels, the so-called moderate
opposition.
And they have been, in many
areas, really
entangled with this
al-Qaida-linked group,
not ideologically, but simply
because they
fight more effectively together.
And I have been told by people
who have spoken
to the military commanders of
these groups
that many of them are very
suspicious.
They say, well, if we have to
disentangle
from the Nusra fighters, who are
the most
effective ones, means we have to
fall back,
the U.S. and Russians will bomb
the Nusra
fighters, and Assad's forces
will come take
the territory.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Margaret,
explain, though,
this apparent division between
the State Department
and the Pentagon over working
with the Russians.
MARGARET WARNER: Well, it's
really interesting,
Judy, because not that you don't
always have
this kind of friction -- or
often -- but to
have it burst into the open like
this.
The other day, I was at a
conference in which
the new head of CENTCOM, General
Votel, was
speaking, and he said, look, we
can't -- there's
a trust deficit with the
Russians.
We don't know what their
objectives are.
They will say one thing, and
they don't follow
up.
And this is particularly true in
this whole
Ukraine over these years of the
Ukraine conflict,
where the Russians would promise
to do one
thing and they would do
something else.
There are also specific risks.
They are not going to really
operate together.
They were supposed to share
intelligence.
So, here are the Nusra fighters,
here are
the ISIS fighters.
But what the Americans are very
afraid of
is that the Russians will take
the information
that superior U.S. intelligence
has, either
use that information to bomb the
U.S.-backed
rebels or pass that info on to
the Assad forces.
One military colonel, one Army
colonel suggested
that to me.
And that also it's hard to tell
the Russians
what we know without indicating
how we know
it.
So the secretary of defense, Ash
Carter, has
actually spoken out.
And the other interesting I
heard today, Judy,
is that this debate is being
used by opponents
of this deal in Moscow to say,
well, if the
American military isn't even
going to obey
the orders, why should we do
anything?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is this really,
though, Margaret,
the last gasp of this
information on Syria,
and if that's the case, then
what happens
after that?
MARGARET WARNER: I'm afraid so.
I went to the very first --
Secretary Kerry
keeps saying, we want to get to
this political
transition, these talks where
there will be
a discussion of a process and
President Assad
will slowly fade away.
But I went to the very first
talks back in,
you know, Switzerland almost
three years ago.
I don't think it's moved at all.
And at this point, that is a
distant dream.
If they could only get at least
an end to
a lot of the carnage on the
ground -- in other
words, they -- Kerry and Lavrov
are now negotiating
over a fifth of a loaf, and that
now even
appears in doubt.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tough, tough
story to follow.
MARGARET WARNER: Yes, very.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Margaret Warner,
we thank you.
Now part two of our
on-the-ground report from
Ohio, one of the crucial swing
states in this
presidential election.
Tonight, John Yang reports from
a county in
Northeastern Ohio that's
normally a Democratic
stronghold, but where, because
of the sluggish
economy, Republicans are hoping
to make inroads.
This story is also part of our
ongoing reporting
initiative Chasing the Dream:
poverty and
Opportunity in America.
JOHN YANG: In the Moore
household in Newton
Falls, Ohio, Donald Trump's
approval rating
is just about 100 percent, three
generations
of voters, including a longtime
Democrat who's
never voted Republican,
enthusiastically backing
the New York millionaire.
You might call 21-year-old Danny
Moore a Trump
scholar.
He wrote a college paper about
his nomination.
DANNY MOORE, Trump Supporter: It
was about
the desire to be part of the
movement to return
America to its greatness and
dominance in
the world.
The dominance of Donald Trump
leads his supporters
to believe he can and will do
this for America.
JOHN YANG: He got an A.
DAN MOORE, Trump Supporter:
We're on a course
that is not sustainable.
JOHN YANG: Danny gave Trump's
book, "The Art
of the Deal," to his father,
Dan, a self-described
swing voter who says he was on
the Obama bandwagon
in 2008 and 2012.
And now?
Who are you voting for this
fall?
DAN MOORE: Absolutely Donald
Trump.
With him being a real estate
developer and
being involved in the
construction industry,
he had to be a good
problem-solver.
FRANCES KIMPTON, Trump
Supporter: He's going
to build the wall, and they're
going to pay
for it.
JOHN YANG: Dan's 75-year-old
mother-in-law,
Frances Kimpton, is a lifelong
Democrat who
switched parties to vote for
Trump in the
Ohio primary.
FRANCES KIMPTON: I would go in,
and I would
vote straight down the ticket
everything Democrat.
But now I'm going to do
everything Republican.
And I can't wait to do it.
JOHN YANG: Trumbull County is
one of Ohio's
most reliably Democratic
counties, delivering
majorities around 60 percent to
the party's
nominees since 1996.
But Trump is trying to narrow
that gap here
and across Northeastern Ohio.
He's visited the region five
times since August
with a message about the
economy.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
We're going to bring jobs back
to Ohio.
JOHN YANG: It's an appeal
tailor-made for
Trumbull County.
One out of every four jobs that
was here 15
years ago is gone, 26,000 in
all, including
more than 1,000 that disappeared
when this
steel mill closed in 2012.
Dan Moore, a member of the
United Steel Workers
Union, has watched the
industry's slow, painful
decline.
DAN MOORE: working-class
families were being
hurt.
They're losing their homes,
they're losing
their cars.
One day, you're middle class or
upper middle
class, and the next day you're
poverty class.
JOHN YANG: He blames trade deals
like NAFTA
championed by President Bill
Clinton.
DAN MOORE: I believe that Donald
Trump can
do something to help, you know,
make it a
fairer playing board.
He's been very clear about his
position on
NAFTA.
I believe that a Trump
presidency will take
a close look at NAFTA and the
language of
that agreement, and, if it can't
be reformed,
he's on record saying we will
walk away from
it.
JOHN YANG: Like her son-in-law,
Frances Kimpton
doesn't think President Obama
has done enough.
FRANCES KIMPTON: When Obama was
running, I
voted for him.
And then I found out that he
didn't live up
to what he said he was going to
do.
I voted for him twice, and I
couldn't believe
how the situation is now.
JOHN YANG: Trade has been an
issue in Trumbull
County since native son William
McKinley was
president.
It was at his memorial in Niles
that we spoke
with Kyle Kondik of the
University of Virginia
Center for Politics.
He wrote a book about Ohio's
significance
in presidential elections, "The
Bellwether."
KYLE KONDIK, University of
Virginia: These
are areas where anti-free trade
populism has
been popular for a very long
time.
This is generally a region that
feels like
maybe it has not benefited from
trade agreements
such as NAFTA.
Trumbull County was actually
Trump's second
best county in the whole state
in terms of
the primary, and there's some
thought that
that will translate to the
general election
as well.
JOHN YANG: But Trump's message
doesn't resonate
with other Democrats here, even
though they
see the same economic
conditions.
At Hillary Clinton's local field
office, Marie
Yancey, a retired autoworker,
was making phone
calls.
MARIE YANCEY, Clinton Volunteer:
With Obama
saving our jobs, she's going to
continue on.
If they had let the auto
industry fail, how
many jobs around here would we
not have?
So, that's why she has my vote.
JOHN YANG: We talked to some
steelworkers
who talk about the steel jobs
that have gone
away.
And they talked about trade.
Some of them are Democrats.
They say that is the reason
they're going
to vote for Trump.
What do you say to them?
MARIE YANCEY: I don't understand
where their
thinking comes from.
I just don't trust Trump.
I think Trump thinks this
presidency is like
running "The Apprentice."
You can't just say, you're
hired.
JOHN YANG: Jim Roan is a retired
banker.
JIM ROAN, Clinton Supporter: I
don't really
see anything concrete about what
he's talking
about.
It's fine to say, this has got
to change,
and I'm going to change it, but
unless he's
Superman, which I don't think he
is, it just
isn't going to change that
easily.
There's some very deep-seated
problems here,
and they're not going to go away
instantly.
JOHN YANG: In this topsy-turvy
election year,
the traditional voting patterns
in this crucial
battleground state are in doubt.
Analyst Kyle Kondik:
KYLE KONDIK: The key question
about Ohio is,
how much can Clinton gain
amongst traditional
Republicans in the affluent
suburbs vs. how
much can Trump gain with
traditional Democrats
in the maybe-not-so-affluent
blue-collar regions
of the state?
JOHN YANG: Like this county,
where declining
economic fortunes are leading
voters like
the Moores to rethink their
political allegiances.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang in Trumbull
County, Ohio.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will bring
you additional
Chasing the Dream ground reports
in the coming
weeks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields
and David Brooks analyze the
week's political
news; students who choose
computer coding
over a college degree; and a
police officer's
take on building public trust.
But, first: As we reported last
week, a protest
in North Dakota continues to
grow against
a major oil pipeline continues
to grow.
Over 100 Native American tribes
have joined
the fight against the project,
saying that
it threatens one tribe's water
supply and
its sacred lands.
While the U.S. Justice
Department has put
a temporary halt to part of the
project, as
the "NewsHour"'s William
Brangham reports,
the fight is far from over.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: After months
of protest,
it was a moment to celebrate.
Last Friday, the Department of
Justice blocked
construction on part of the $4
billion Dakota
Access Pipeline, the very
pipeline that brought
these thousands of protesters
here to rural
North Dakota.
But celebration soon turned to
suspicion.
That's because work on the
pipeline hasn't
fully stopped.
In areas outside of federal
jurisdiction,
construction continues, as do
efforts to block
it.
At least 22 people were arrested
this week.
LIZ MCKENZIE, Protester: It is
most definitely
not a victory.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Liz McKenzie
drove 1,000
miles from Albuquerque to
protest with her
fellow Native Americans.
LIZ MCKENZIE: People are finally
noticing
us, not as beings of the past,
not as, like,
costumes you buy in Halloween
stores.
Like, we are here, we are still
fighting,
and that does mean a lot.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Dakota
Access Pipeline
begins in North Dakota's Bakken
oil fields,
and would carry crude oil almost
1,200 miles
through South Dakota and Iowa
down to Illinois.
The pipeline's original path
crossed the Missouri
River just north of Bismarck, a
city that's
90 percent white.
But when concerns were raised
about a potential
oil spill there, the pipeline
was rerouted
south to go under the river
right next to
the Standing Rock Reservation.
The Missouri River is the
reservation's primary
source of drinking water.
The tribe says a spill there
could be catastrophic
for them.
So, when construction started, a
plea for
help went out.
LADONNA BRAVE BULL ALLARD,
Standing Rock Sioux
Tribe: I am asking anybody who's
willing to
stand with us to say that water
is important
to come stand with us.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Ladonna Brave
Bull Allard
put out that call.
She is a member of Standing
Rock, and her
land looks over the ridge where
the pipeline
would be built.
LADONNA BRAVE BULL ALLARD: When
I put the
call out, I really thought maybe
40 people
would come.
It's overwhelming.
In my own vision, I didn't
expect this.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Now over a
hundred Native
American tribes from across
North America
have joined Standing Rock's
movement.
And in this sprawling camp, a
community has
formed.
This kitchen serves donated food
to all.
Kids can take classes at a
makeshift school.
Cords of donated firewood are
split and stacked,
free for the taking.
Why do you think that this has
taken off and
spoken to so many people from so
many parts
of the country?
LADONNA BRAVE BULL ALLARD: The
water.
We know how precious that water
is.
We know that we must stand for
the water.
Mni Wiconi, we say, water of
life.
So, every time we drink water,
we remind ourself
how important the water is.
Don't you do that?
You will now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Protecting the
water spurred
Brenda Guachena to drive 30
hours from Southern
California to be here.
She's from the Rincon Band of
Luiseno Indians.
She came with dozens of people,
including
her grandkids, and brought
trucks full of
donated supplies.
BRENDA GUACHENA, Rincon Band of
Luiseno Indians:
Walking in, it was so humbling
to see all
of these flags.
All of the people, of the native
people in
all the reservations that showed
up here to
show Standing Rock, we're here
to support
you, and we're not going to let
people do
this to us anymore.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Guy Jones was
born in Standing
Rock.
He says the tribes are tired of
being ignored.
GUY JONES, North Dakota: They
didn't want
it in Bismarck, but it was, oh,
it's OK if
the Indians -- you can go down
and run it
through the reservation where
all those Indians
live.
You know, who cares about the
Indians?
And that's one of the things
that kind of
incensed people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The company
that's building
the pipeline energy, Energy
Transfer Partners,
says it's followed all the
rules.
And it points out the pipeline
isn't even
on a reservation land.
Plus, it argues that moving oil
via modern
pipelines is a far safer way
than putting
it on trucks or trains, which
statistics show
are far more likely to crash and
spill.
It also says the pipeline will
generate revenue
and jobs for North Dakota.
We asked the company several
times to talk
with us on camera.
They didn't make anyone
available.
We did speak with Ron Ness,
president of the
North Dakota Petroleum Council,
the trade
association that includes Energy
Transfer
Partners.
RON NESS, President, North
Dakota Petroleum
Council: Pipelines are the most
safe -- most
efficient, safest, and
cost-effective way
to move oil to market.
And the products get there
virtually 100 percent
of the time without issue.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That said, the
2.5 million
miles of oil and gas pipelines
across the
U.S. do sometimes leak and
rupture, and when
they do, they often spill far
more oil than
a single train car carries.
Since 1995, there's been more
than 2,000 significant
accidents on oil and gas
pipelines, causing
about $3 billion in property
damage.
For example, in July 2010, at
least 800,000
gallons of crude oil spilled
into the Kalamazoo
River near Marshall, Michigan.
It was one of the largest inland
oil spills
in U.S. history, and the
costliest.
Almost 5,000 acres of wetland
habitat was
inundated with oil.
Hundreds of animals were killed.
Thousands more were recovered,
cleaned and
released.
Full recovery could take
decades.
And just this summer, a pipeline
in Canada
spilled about 65,000 gallons of
oil and other
toxins into the North
Saskatchewan River,
polluting the drinking water
used by the James
Smith Cree Nation.
The Petroleum Council says those
kinds of
spills near the Standing Rock
Reservation
are very unlikely.
RON NESS: This pipe is 90 feet
below the riverbed.
It's not going to leak right
into the river.
It's got the detection equipment
and the shutoff
valves on each side of this
pipeline.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But Ladonna
Allard doesn't
believe the industry's
assurances.
She says half-a-million gallons
of oil coursing
every day under their drinking
water is not
safe.
LADONNA BRAVE BULL ALLARD: When
that oil spills,
who's going to come save us?
We're Indian people.
We're expendable.
Who is going to come?
Who is going to come and give us
water?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The tribe's
other concern
is that, even though the
pipeline is just
off their reservation, it still
runs right
through areas they say are
sacred ancestral
grounds.
Ten days ago, the tribe
submitted evidence
of newly discovered artifacts
and burial sites,
asking a state court for an
emergency injunction.
But before the court could make
a decision,
bulldozers started digging in
that area.
Protesters broke through a fence
to try and
stop them.
They were met with pepper spray
and guard
dogs.
Last month, the tribe sued the
U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, arguing that, in
its meetings
with the tribe, the Corps
ignored their concerns.
David Archambault II is chairman
of the Standing
Rock Sioux Tribe.
DAVID ARCHAMBAULT II, Chairman,
Standing Rock
Sioux Tribe: They never heard
us.
It was just a process that keeps
moving forward
because of the interest of
economic development,
the interest of money, the
interest of greed.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But, last
Friday, a federal
court in Washington rejected the
tribe's suit,
allowing the pipeline to
proceed.
It was at that point that the
Justice Department
halted the project, directing
the Corps and
other agencies to take a second
look at the
tribe's concerns.
Now that the Department of
Justice has stepped
in and said they're going to
halt this construction,
temporarily at least, is this
over for you?
DAVID ARCHAMBAULT II: It's far
from over,
and we knew this coming in.
Regardless of the outcome from
the court's
decision, this was the
beginning.
It's the start.
We finally are getting people to
hear.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For now, on
the lands near
the reservation, construction
equipment sits
idle while the federal reviews
are under way.
Despite this delay, work on the
pipeline continues
elsewhere in North Dakota.
Back at the camp, people have
begun building
shelters, so their vigil can
carry on through
the coming winter.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham
near the Standing Rock
Reservation in North
Dakota.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On a related
note, a large
gasoline pipeline that supplies
the Eastern
United States was shut down this
week after
a quarter-million gallons of
gasoline leaked
near Birmingham, Alabama.
And, online, you can hear more
Native American
voices from the front lines of
the Standing
Rock protest in an audio slide
show.
That's on our Facebook page,
Facebook.com/NewsHour.
Next, to the analysis of Shields
and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks.
Welcome back, gentlemen.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're together in
person.
It's good to see you.
Mark, let's start with the
birther lie.
It's the only way to describe
it.
Donald Trump talked about this
for years.
Today, he did finally say that
he believes
the president, President Obama,
was born in
the United States.
But then he turned around and
said Hillary
Clinton started all this.
Where does this leave this story
about the
birther controversy?
MARK SHIELDS: I'm not absolutely
sure.
But I think it's important to
establish right
at the outset that he wasn't
only the loudest
and the highest-profile and the
most persistent
and the most well-publicized
birther, he,
Donald Trump.
He lied.
He lied consistently and
persistently.
And, today, without explanation
or excuse,
he just changed his position and
tried to
absolutely falsely shift the
blame onto Hillary
Clinton.
And this was an appeal to -- he
debased democracy.
He debased the national debate.
He appealed to that which is
most ignoble
or least noble in all of us
And I think -- I would like to
put to rest
right now one of the great
theories of the
Clinton, Bill Clinton, years.
Bill Clinton was accused of
being a skirt
chaser, a draft dodger, trimming
the truth.
And we were told by all sorts of
conservative
religious leaders, politically
religious leaders, then,
character, character
was the dominant issue.
That's why you had to oppose
Bill Clinton
and support his impeachment.
We have a man running right now
for president
right now who's without
character.
He's AWOL.
He and character are mutually
exclusive.
And the silence, with rare and
conspicuous
and admirable exceptions, with
Mr. Moore of
the Southern Baptists and Mr.
Mohler, is -- is
just deafening.
We found out that character is
not an issue.
The Supreme Court turns out to
be the defining
issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David.
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I agree.
What struck me was that,
especially reading
the comment, the statement from
the Trump
campaign, which we heard
summarized by Trump
himself earlier in the
broadcast, you know,
we're always used to spin.
Usually, there's some tangential
relationship
to the truth, but a corroding
to the truth, frankly, as
politics has gone
on over the years.
But now we're in a reverse,
Orwellian inversion
of the truth with this.
And so we have a team of
staffers and then
the candidate himself who have
taken the normal
spin and smashed all the rules.
And so we are really in Orwell
land.
We are in "1984."
And it's interesting that an
authoritarian
personality type comes in at the
same time
with a complete disrespect for
even tangential
relationship to the truth that
words are unmoored.
And so I do think this statement
sort of shocked
me with the purification of a
lot of terrible
trends that have been happening.
And so what's white is black,
and what is
up is down, what is down is up.
And that really is something new
in politics.
And the fact that there is no
penalty for
it, apparently -- he's doing
fantastic in
the last two weeks in the polls
-- is just
somehow where we have gotten.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it does
come, Mark, as
the polls are tightening.
And it's to the benefit of
Donald Trump.
Hillary Clinton has slipped.
Donald Trump is up.
He's ahead in some of the
battleground states.
What are we -- I asked both of
you last week
what you think is going on.
I mean, do you -- is there some
new evidence
or explanation for what's
happening?
MARK SHIELDS: I mean, I don't
know if this
is a precise explanation, Judy,
but certainly
I think it's a valid possibility
that, as
he has become -- he doesn't
punch out the
cleaning lady, he doesn't abuse
parking lot
attendants on camera, therefore,
he's now
presidential.
The fact that he hasn't tweeted
without -- with
a couple of exceptions, that he
is working
off a Teleprompter, which he at
one point
wanted to outlaw and prohibit,
and somehow
is talking about -- about
policies, not talking
policy.
He is talking about the
possibility of policy.
You know, I -- then he becomes
somehow more
acceptable to people, And I
think particularly
to Republicans.
He was getting a high 70 percent
of Republicans.
Now several most -- or recent
polls have showed
him getting in the high 80
percent of Republicans.
And I think that accounts for
his surge or
lift.
DAVID BROOKS: Well, he's running
against a
candidate who doesn't know why
she wants to
be president, at least that she
can express
to anybody else.
And so, as we have been saying
for 18 months,
this is a change year, what
change is Hillary
Clinton offering?
And so, if you want change, you
have only
got one option.
And so as he becomes only
moderately terrible,
he becomes acceptable, and I
think grudgingly
acceptable to most people, not
enthusiastically
acceptable, but grudgingly
acceptable.
And we're now at a point he's
doing well in
Ohio, he's doing well around the
country.
He's almost tied nationally.
But I think we're now at the
point where one
adequate debate performance by
him and suddenly
he almost becomes either even or
even a slight
front-runner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Really?
DAVID BROOKS: And this is at a
time, it should
be remembered, when, according
to the last
Washington Post poll, 62 percent
of Americans
said he's not qualified to be
president.
So both these things are
happening at the
same time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which raises some
questions.
But this has happened.
And, by the way, we should
mentioned again,
it now is clear it's just going
to be Donald
Trump and Hillary Clinton, that
these other
candidate, Gary Johnson and Jill
Stein, will
not be involved.
But, Mark, it also comes as
Hillary Clinton's
has had some problems, the
basket of deplorables
comment from a week ago.
Some people have said that is
going to be
something the Trump people will
hang around
her neck for the rest of the
campaign.
Is that the kind of thing that
just is damaging
and it keeps on being damaging?
MARK SHIELDS: Sure.
Sure it is.
I can recall, as you do, David
does, in 2008,
when -- at a fund-raiser, when
the front-runner
said people in small
Pennsylvania towns who
had lost hope and lost jobs
cling to their
guns and religion.
And his opponent said Americans
deserve a
leader who will stand up for
them, not a leader
who looks down on them.
That was Barack Obama who said
that, Hillary
Clinton who took advantage of
it, won the
Pennsylvania primary.
These things happen at
fund-raisers, Judy.
Mitt Romney, Palm Beach, stand
up and says,
47 percent of Americans, I can't
tell them
to take responsibility for their
own live.
They expect a job.
They expect a paycheck.
They expect health care.
They expect food.
Telling people what they want to
hear, that's
what Hillary Clinton was doing
last Friday
night, telling a New York
liberal crowd that,
you know, the people on the
other side were
xenophobic, they were racist,
they were homophobic,
Islamophobic, you name it.
And it -- I will tell you, what
bothered me
the most -- and Donald Trump
took advantage
of it, and understandably -- she
had done
the same thing in 2008, when she
took advantage
of it -- what bothered me the
most was irredeemable.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: You don't --
America is built
on redemption.
People came here because things
weren't working
out.
My generation, the old, oldest
fart generation,
OK, 13 percent of us were in
favor of same-sex
marriage 15 years ago, now 41
percent.
On civil rights, America changed
has dramatically
and profoundly.
We believe in redemption, not
just because
you're a liberal, because you're
an American.
And that -- when you write off
people and
blame the customer, that is
really bad.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, David,
Barack Obama stayed
in a race, overcame that, was
elected president.
Is this more damaging for
Hillary Clinton
than -- clearly that was
damaging, too, but...
DAVID BROOKS: Right, that was
damaging, too.
There's two elements here.
One is snobbery.
And as Mark says, it's just us
rich people
talking to each other about
those poor people.
And that never works.
And then there's the sociology
element.
They both -- it's bad sociology.
They should leave the sociology
to us amateurs.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: But, third, the
irredeemable
is what leapt out at me.
And the person who was at the
Emanuel Baptist
-- AME Church in Charleston,
they believe
the guy who shot and killed
their close friends
was redeemable, but she thinks
millions of
Americans aren't?>
And that speaks and I think it
plays, because
there is a brittleness there.
And I don't know if there is a
brittleness
within.
I sort of doubt it.
I think she's probably a very
good person
within.
But there has been a brittleness
to her public
persona that has been ungenerous
and ungracious.
And it plays a little to that
and why people
just don't want to latch on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and, David,
your comment
a minute ago about Hillary
Clinton, and both
of you have been saying this in
one way or
another for a number of months,
hasn't given
a rationale, a reason to vote
for her for
president.
Mark, do you still feel you're
not hearing
that from Hillary Clinton?
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, I mean, by a
10-to-1 margin
in swing states, battleground
states, they
have outspent Donald Trump on
television.
And their message has been
relentless.
It's been in his own words.
It's been true, things he's
said.
They have run up all the
negatives they can
run up Donald Trump.
They have told people this is a
man who's
a bully, he's mean-spirited,
he's narrow-minded,
he's all of these things, he's
not to be trusted,
not to be believed, and here's
the evidence
of it.
And yet, among
18-to-34-year-olds, a key
element
in Barack Obama's winning, his
coalition,
she's at 27 percent favorable,
56 percent
favorable.
It isn't just a matter of
policy.
She has adopted Bernie Sanders'
positions
on student loans and so forth.
There's got to be something
there.
There has got to be a connection
as to what
she wants to do, how she's going
to be a better
-- and it's going to be a better
America and
why it makes a difference.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
And it's too late for her to be
likable.
She's not going to win that.
But she can at least say, OK,
you don't like
him, you don't like me, but
here's my change.
Here's my change.
And just four things, here's my
change.
And I'm going to burn down the
house on this.
But somehow that clarity of
message has not
been there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And there were
some economic
numbers, census report, David,
that came out
this week that said the poverty
rate has improved
in this country.
Middle -- people who are earning
middle incomes,
their salaries have gone up.
And yet, you know, you still
see, as we saw
in John Yang's report from Ohio,
many Americans
aren't feeling that.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
The numbers were fantastic.
The poorer you are, the better
your increase,
basically.
And the decline in the poverty
rate, decline
in inequality, the numbers were
just fantastic.
And I think two things are going
on here.
One, it's not touching
everywhere.
Obviously, if you're in a coal
or an industrial
area, you're still not feeling
it.
Second, the incomes are still,
on average,
lower than they were in 1999 in
real terms.
But, third, we are
over-reporting the negativism
in this country, that we are --
every -- if
it's not bad, then we don't talk
about it,
because somehow that's a
betrayal...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's more
newsworthy.
Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: And the negativity
is exaggerated,
compared to what you actually
see in the diversity
of the country.
MARK SHIELDS: That's a good
point.
Judy, cheers to John Yang on
that wonderful
piece on Trumbull County, Ohio,
where, 15
years ago, one out of four jobs
have been
lost in the past 15 years.
And he explained just exactly
what has gone
to the Rust Belt of America.
But let's just say good news.
This is good news.
The rising tide lifts all
yachts.
It's row boats and dinghies.
And poverty is down, and income
up, the highest,
Judy, in 49 years.
Something -- maybe the president
deserves
a little credit.
Maybe policies are working and
America, it
isn't midnight.
It could be dawn.
Mr. Trump, cheer up.
Eventually, the news will get
worse.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mea culpa, the
news business
focuses on the negative.
It makes better stories.
Thank you both, Mark Shields,
David Brooks.
See you next week.
And, tonight, we wrap up our
week-long series
Rethinking College with a look
at students
who are choosing cheaper and
shorter computer
coding training as an
alternative to a college
degree.
Hari Sreenivasan has our report.
WES REID, Coding Instructor:
We're going to
just be taking notes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's called a
high-tech
boot camp, six months of intense
work that
turns a beginner computer coder
into a software
engineer.
WES REID: I'm going to show guys
a tool.
If it stresses you out, don't
use it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The academics
are difficult,
but the camps all but promise
jobs that pay
more than double the median
income in America.
WES REID: It's an immersive
program.
It's incredibly tough.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So tough, only
20 percent
of those who apply get accepted.
Instructor Wes Reid:
WES REID: The things that we're
really focused
on is, how do we get people as
career-ready
as fast as possible?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Students are
flooding in.
From 2014 to 2015, the number of
graduates
from coding boot camps jumped by
138 percent.
MAN: And there isn't, like, any
general education
classes that you have to take or
stuff that's
not necessary used for your end
goal.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's a
learning model that
is not only experiencing
explosive growth,
but also attracting tens of
millions of dollars
of private investment.
JIM DETERS, Co-Founder and CEO,
Galvanize:
The world is evolving so quickly
that, in
these times, we have got to
constantly be
reskilling, upskilling and
moving.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Denver-based
Galvanize,
one of the new breed of
high-tech schools,
just received a $45 million
investment.
JIM DETERS: We have grown to
1,700 students
we will teach this year.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jim Deters is
the CEO and
founder of Galvanize.
JIM DETERS: We have moved to a
skills-based
economy, and we want to create
alternative
paths for anybody with aptitude,
drive, and
determination to have an
opportunity and get
more affordable access to
skills.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As the price
of a traditional
college education soars, what's
emerging are
cheaper alternatives like
software boot camps,
places that teach very specific
skills for
jobs that pay well.
So far, federal education
officials like what
they see.
Last month, the Department of
Education opened
up $17 million for students to
pay for boot
camps like New York's Flatiron
School.
Secretary of Education John
King:
JOHN KING, U.S. Education
Secretary: We're
trying to identify pathways that
will help
people get access to good jobs
in high-demand
fields.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Eight coding
schools that
partner with accredited colleges
will now
be able to offer federal loans
and grants
under a new pilot project called
EQUIP.
JOHN KING: We know that we need
to ensure
we have the work force ready to
compete in
the 21st century, and we need
new pathways
and new innovation to ensure
that we have
the work force we need.
Coding is a good example, huge
demand for
folks with coding skills, but
we're not producing
enough.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Some boot
camps aren't waiting
for government funds to help
their students
pay the $10,000 to $20,000
tuition costs.
Galvanize has partnered with the
private lender
Skills Fund.
Skills Fund allows students to
pay interest-only
loans until they graduate.
JIM DETERS: Regardless whether
they have a
B.A., or dropped out of
community college,
or they came from straight out
of high school,
we want to create that pathway.
HARI SREENIVASAN:
Twenty-two-year-old Isaac
Collier held multiple jobs after
high school,
but never made more than
$20,000.
ISAAC COLLIER, Student: I was an
audiovisual
technician, and I was also
instructing martial
arts, and instructing teaching
of guitar.
The pay was never enough.
It just got tiring.
It was paycheck to paycheck.
HARI SREENIVASAN: At first
glance, Galvanize
seemed too expensive for
Collier.
The boot camp's Web development
class costs
$21,000.
ISAAC COLLIER: I was like
really, really nervous.
It was too expensive.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But, once
accepted, Collier
found that getting a private
loan was easy.
That's because Skills Fund
partners only with
coding boot camps that have high
graduation
and job placement rates.
JIM DETERS: Our placement rates
are around
90-plus percent.
WES REID: Its position, like,
this would be
like position absolute.
HARI SREENIVASAN: After boot
camp, Collier
expects to land an $80,000
salary as a software
developer.
ISAAC COLLIER: It's something
that's very
challenging.
It's very hard, but I feel like
the reward
is well worth it.
WES REID: The determining factor
isn't if
you had higher education.
It's how much you're willing to
work during
the class and really put in the
effort.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Alexander Holt
is a policy
analyst with New America.
Holt likes the Skills Fund
model, because,
unlike traditional student
loans, the money
is tied to actual job placement.
ALEXANDER HOLT, New America:
Effectively,
what Skills Fund is trying to do
is be a private
market accreditor, so they're
trying to mimic
what the federal government
does, except all
the incentives are in the right
place in the
private market.
JIM DETERS: We won't get paid if
they don't
get paid.
We're really aligning our
interests with both
the student and the lender in a
way, honestly,
that it should be.
ALEXANDER HOLT: It makes more
sense to have
the risk on private lenders and
private companies,
as opposed to the taxpayer.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Critics of the
department
of education's new EQUIP program
are concerned
government lending may encourage
the kind
of abuses that became notorious
with for-profit
colleges.
NARRATOR: We are Corinthian
Colleges.
ALEXANDER HOLT: You open up all
of these federal
dollars, and you don't have
great accountability,
and bad actors flood in.
And these schools end up just
enrolling a
lot of low-income students, and
we have terrible
outcomes, and the students are
left with debt.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Given that
for-profit colleges
have a mixed track record, at
best, of succeeding
in putting people back in the
work force,
why?
Why take this route?
JOHN KING: This is a very
targeted initiative
focused on work force
development.
We will rigorously evaluate it
to make sure
that it's working.
If programs aren't working, we
will stop them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So far, boot
camps have
won high job placement rates by
enrolling
students who already have
college degrees.
But new students with less
traditional educations
pose new challenges.
ALEXANDER HOLT: One thing that's
unclear is,
are employers hiring these
people because
they also have a bachelor's
degree?
Will they just hire them if they
only have
the certificate from the boot
camps?
HARI SREENIVASAN: As his first
exposure to
post-secondary education, Isaac
Collier says
coding is a good fit.
ISAAC COLLIER: It's a good
challenge.
It's always overcoming
obstacles.
And I feel smarter, honestly,
after it.
I just -- I do.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour,"
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, to
another in our
Brief But Spectacular series.
Tonight, Oakland, California,
police officer
Damon Gilbert offers his candid
thoughts on
what it means to wear a badge in
2016.
DAMON GILBERT, Oakland,
California, Police
Department: Any time you put on
a bulletproof
vest to start your day off to
work, you have
to know that you may or may not
come back
home to your child, to your
wife, to your
grandmother, to your auntie.
And that in itself is scary.
That in itself is scary.
Anybody that tells you that they
haven't been
scared, I'm under the full
impression that
they're a total liar.
It's there, and you're human.
You're not a robot.
You actually have emotions.
We train you and put you in
realistic predicaments.
How do I make sure that my
finger is not on
the trigger, but my finger is
indexed?
How do I function when I'm
talking to the
radio while keeping an eye on
unknown threats?
Many times, I have given a
direct order or
a lawful order, and it's been
met with (EXPLETIVE
DELETED) you, or it's been met
with, come
on, let's fight.
For me, I have never been in
that situation
where I have actually had to
pull the trigger.
Every time you see something on
TV, it's a
clip of an officer with a gun.
And what tends to happen is, the
community
thinks that every call an
officer goes to,
they're using their gun.
That's not the case.
And, in Oakland, we work in one
of the most
violent cities in North America.
When we see videos that are
definitely disturbing,
it hits home.
When you see it as a citizen,
and it shocks
your conscience, a lot of times,
when I see
the same footage or we see the
same footage,
it shocks our conscience as
well.
And then we want answers.
My heart sank when I have seen
everything
that I have seen over the past
couple months,
couple years.
Seeing the response to different
riots, and
different violent protests,
protests that
go wrong, it's heartbreaking,
because I see
both sides.
I see the officers out there who
are probably
on a 24-hour day, and people
don't know that.
And then I understand the other
end, where
people are frustrated.
They have seen different things
that definitely
leave some questions that need
to be answered,
and they're angry.
Sometimes, you have to give the
people a voice,
and that maybe their anger isn't
necessarily
towards you.
It may be toward another contact
that they
had with another police officer
10 years ago.
It's tough for the
African-American community
when dealing with the police.
I personally have been pulled
over multiple
times as a police officer.
I actually was arrested in high
school for
doing something I didn't do.
Why would I want to impose that
feeling on
you?
Because I was mad, I was angry,
I was disappointed,
I wanted revenge.
There's a difference between
getting into
police work for the right
reasons and the
wrong reasons.
The wrong reasons would be, I
don't like people,
I don't like talking with
people.
The wrong reasons would be,
well, I want to
feel -- well, it makes me feel
bigger, and
badder, and tougher.
You get into this business to
help out the
community, to serve the
community, to be a
servant.
I know my circle of influence is
very small,
but it starts with me.
So, when I go out there, I have
to make sure
that I'm doing the right thing.
And I believe that will help
start the process
of doing things correctly and
building back
the public trust.
My name is Damon Gilbert.
And this is my Brief But
Spectacular take
on being a police officer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You can watch
additional Brief
But Spectacular episodes on our
Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week,"
which airs later this evening --
Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Hey, Judy.
So, you boil it all down, and
the question
this week comes down to, who do
you believe?
Is Donald Trump done questioning
the president's
citizenship?
Is Hillary Clinton healthy?
Can you cut taxes and still,
say, repair the
nation's bridges?
As the polls tighten, we examine
what's at
stake tonight on "Washington
Week."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
watching.
And we will be back right here
on Monday with
my interview with "The
Atlantic"'s Jonathan
Rauch to discuss his theory that
American
politics has gone off the rails
because of
too much reform.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.